GUIDANCE NOTE
ON MANAGEMENT OF OPERATIONAL RISK

RESERVE BANK OF INDIA
DEPARTMENT OF BANKING OPERATIONS
AND DEVELOPMENT
CENTRAL OFFICE
MUMBAI

INDEX
GUIDANCE NOTE ON OPERATIONAL RISK MANAGEMENT
Subject
1

Executive Summary

2

Background

3

Organisational set-up
Operational Risk

4

Policy requirements and strategic approach

5

Identification and Assessment of Operational Risk

6

Monitoring of Operational Risk

7

Controls / Mitigation of Operational Risk

8

Independent evaluation of Operational Risk Management

9

Capital allocation for Operational Risk

and

Key

responsibilities

for

Annex 1

Indicative role of Organisational arm of risk management
structure

Annex 2

Mapping of Business Lines

Annex 3

Loss Event type classification

Annex 4

Advanced Measurement Methodologies

PREFACE
As a step towards enhancing and fine-tuning the risk management practices as
also to serve as a benchmark to banks, the Reserve Bank had issued Guidance
Notes on management of credit risk and market risk in October 2002. The
guidance notes are placed on our web-site for wider dissemination.

The New Capital Adequacy Framework requires banks to hold capital explicitly
towards operational risk. In view of this as also the felt need for a similar guidance
note on management of operational risk, this Guidance Note has been prepared.
This guidance note is an outline of a set of sound principles for effective
management and supervision of operational risk by banks.

Banks may use the Guidance Note for upgrading their operational risk
management system. The design and architecture for management of operational
risk should be oriented towards banks' own requirements dictated by the size and
complexity of business, risk philosophy, market perception and the expected level
of capital. The exact approach may, therefore, differ from bank to bank. Hence the
systems, procedures and tools prescribed in this Guidance Note are indicative.

Executive Summary
Growing number of high-profile operational loss events worldwide have led banks
and supervisors to increasingly view operational risk management as an integral
part of the risk management activity. Management of specific operational risks is
not a new practice; it has always been important for banks to try to prevent fraud,
maintain the integrity of internal controls, reduce errors in transaction processing,
and so on. However, what is relatively new is the view of operational risk
management as a comprehensive practice comparable to the management of
credit and market risk. 'Management' of operational risk is taken to mean the
'identification, assessment, and / or measurement, monitoring and control /
mitigation' of this risk.
2. The Guidance Note is structured into 8 chapters. This Guidance Note defines
Operational Risk and its likely manifestation in Chapter 1. In order to create an
enabling organisational culture and placing high priority on effective operational
risk management and implementation of risk management processes, Chapter 2
gives a typical outline of the organisational set-up in the bank, together with the
responsibilities of the Board and Senior Management. Chapter 3 deals with the
policy requirements and strategic approach to Operational Risk Management.
The policies and procedures should outline all aspects of the bank's Operational
Risk Management Framework. Chapter 4 deals with issues of identification and
assessment of Operational Risk. Chapter 5 deals with monitoring of Operational
Risk. This chapter has put in one place the business lines that a bank needs to
identify and the principles underlying mapping of these business lines. Details of
effective control / mitigation of Operational Risk are dealt in Chapter 6. Internal
audit and its scope for an independent evaluation of the Operational Risk
Management function are dealt under Chapter 7. Although the Guidance Note is
an outline of sound principles for effective management and supervision of
operational risk by banks, capital allocation for Operational Risk based on Basic
Indicator Approach is outlined in Chapter 8.

3. The exact approach for operational risk management chosen by banks will
depend on a range of factors. Despite these differences, clear strategies and
oversight by the Board of Directors and senior management, a strong operational

risk management culture, effective internal control and reporting, contingency
planning are crucial elements for an effective operational risk management
framework. Initiatives required to be taken by banks in this regard will include the
following:
o The Board of Directors is primarily responsible for ensuring effective
management of the operational risks in banks. The bank's Board of
Directors has the ultimate responsibility for ensuring that the senior
management establishes and maintains an adequate and effective system
of internal controls.
o Operational risk management should be identified and introduced as an
independent risk management function across the entire bank/ banking
group.
o The

senior

management

should

have

clear

responsibilities

for

implementing operational risk management as approved by the Board of
Directors.
o The board of directors and senior management are responsible for
creating an awareness of Operational Risks and establishing a culture
within the bank that emphasises and demonstrates to all the levels of
personnel the importance of Operational Risk.
o The direction for effective operational risk management should be
embedded in the policies and procedures that clearly describe the key
elements for identifying, assessing, monitoring and controlling / mitigating
operational risk.
o The internal audit function assists the senior management and the Board
by independently reviewing application and effectiveness of operational
risk management procedures and practices approved by the Board/ senior
management.
o The New Capital Adequacy Framework has put forward various options for
calculating operational risk capital charge in a "continuum" of increasing
sophistication and risk sensitivity and increasing complexity. Despite the
fact that banks may adopt any one of these options for computing capital
charge, it is intended that they will benchmark their operational risk
management systems with the guidance provided in this Note and aim to
move towards more sophisticated approaches.

Chapter 1
Background
1.1 Financial institutions are in the business of risk management and hence are
incentivised to develop sophisticated risk management systems. The basic
components of a risk management system are identifying the risks the entity is
exposed to, assessing their magnitude, monitoring them, controlling or mitigating
them using a variety of procedures, and setting aside capital for potential losses
(including expected losses and unexpected losses)*
1.2. Deregulation and globalisation of financial services, together with the growing
sophistication of financial technology, are making the activities of banks and thus
their profiles more complex. Evolving banking practices suggest that risks other
than credit risks and market risks can be substantial. Examples of these new and
growing risks faced by banks include:


Highly Automated Technology - If not properly controlled, the greater use
of more highly automated technology has the potential to transform risks
from manual processing errors to system failure risks, as greater reliance
is placed on integrated systems.



Emergence of E- Commerce – Growth of e-commerce brings with it
potential risks (e.g. internal and external fraud and system securities
issues)



Emergence of banks acting as very large volume service providers
creates the need for continual maintenance of high-grade internal controls
and back-up systems.



Outsourcing – growing use of outsourcing arrangements and the
participation in clearing and settlement systems can mitigate some risks
but can also present significant other risks to banks.



Large-scale acquisitions, mergers, de-mergers and consolidations test the
viability of new or newly integrated systems.



Banks may engage in risk mitigation techniques (e.g. collateral,
derivatives, netting arrangements and asset securitisations) to optimise
their exposure to market risk and credit risk, but which in turn may
produce other forms of risk (eg. legal risk).

* Para 669 (b) of the International Convergence of Capital Measurement & Capital Standards – A
Revised Framework, June 2004.

Definition
1.3. Definition of operational risk has evolved rapidly over the past few years. At
first, it was commonly defined as every type of unquantifiable risk faced by a
bank. However, further analysis has refined the definition considerably.
Operational risk has been defined by the Basel Committee on Banking
Supervision1 as the risk of loss resulting from inadequate or failed internal
processes, people and systems or from external events. This definition
includes legal risk, but excludes strategic and reputational risk. This
definition is based on the underlying causes of operational risk. It seeks to identify
why a loss happened and at the broadest level includes the breakdown by four
causes: people, processes, systems and external factors.
Likely forms of manifestation of operational risk
1.4. A clear appreciation and understanding by banks of what is meant by
operational risk is critical to the effective management and control of this risk
category. It is also important to consider the full range of material operational risks
facing the bank and capture all significant causes of severe operational losses.
Operational risk is pervasive, complex and dynamic. Unlike market and credit risk,
which tend to be in specific areas of business, operational risk is inherent in all
business processes. Operational risk may manifest in a variety of ways in the
banking industry. The examples of operational risks listed at paragraph 1.2 above
can be considered as illustrative.
1.5. The Basel Committee has identified2 the following types of operational risk
events as having the potential to result in substantial losses:
• Internal fraud. For example, intentional misreporting of positions, employee
theft, and insider trading on an employee’s own account.
• External fraud. For example, robbery, forgery, cheque kiting, and damage
from computer hacking.
• Employment practices and workplace safety. For example, workers
compensation claims, violation of employee health and safety rules,
organised labour activities, discrimination claims, and general liability.
1
2

ibid, June 2004
ibid, June 2004- Annex 6

• Clients, products and business practices. For example, fiduciary
breaches, misuse of confidential customer information, improper trading
activities on the bank’s account, money laundering, and sale of unauthorised
products.
• Damage to physical assets.
earthquakes, fires and floods.

For

example,

terrorism,

vandalism,

• Business disruption and system failures. For example, hardware and
software failures, telecommunication problems, and utility outages.
• Execution, delivery and process management. For example: data entry
errors, collateral management failures, incomplete legal documentation, and
unauthorized access given to client accounts, non-client counterparty
misperformance, and vendor disputes.

Chapter 2
Organisational Set-up and Key Responsibilities
for Operational Risk Management
Relevance of Operational risk function
2.1 Growing number of high-profile operational loss events worldwide have led
banks and supervisors to increasingly view operational risk management as an
integral part of risk management activity. Management of specific operational
risks is not a new practice; it has always been important for banks to try to
prevent fraud, maintain the integrity of internal controls, reduce errors in
transaction processing, and so on. However, what is relatively new is the view
that operational risk management is a comprehensive practice comparable to the
management of credit and market risks.
2.2 Operational Risk differs from other banking risks in that it is typically not
directly taken in return for an expected reward but is implicit in the ordinary
course of corporate activity and has the potential to affect the risk management
process. However, it is recognised that in some business lines with minimal credit
or market risks, the decision to incur operational risk, or compete based on the
perceived ability to manage and effectively price this risk, is an integral part of a
bank's risk / reward calculus.

At the same time, failure to properly manage

operational risk can result in a misstatement of an institution's risk profile and
expose the institution to significant losses. 'Management' of operational risk is
taken to mean the 'identification, assessment and / or measurement,
monitoring and control / mitigation' of this risk.
Organizational set up and culture
2.3

Operational risk is intrinsic to a bank and should hence be an important

component of its enterprise wide risk management systems. The Board and
senior management should create an enabling organizational culture placing high
priority on effective operational risk management and adherence to sound
operating procedures. Successful implementation of risk management process
has to emanate from the top management with the demonstration of strong

commitment to integrate the same into the basic operations and strategic decision
making processes. Therefore, Board and senior management should promote an
organizational culture for management of operational risk.

2.4

It is recognised that the approach for operational risk management that

may be chosen by an individual bank will depend on a range of factors, including
size and sophistication, nature and complexity of its activities. However, despite
these differences, clear strategies and oversight by the Board of Directors and
senior management; a strong operational risk culture, i.e., the combined set of
individual and corporate values, attitudes, competencies and behaviour that
determine a bank's commitment to and style of operational risk management;
internal control culture (including clear lines of responsibility and segregation of
duties); effective internal reporting; and contingency planning are all crucial
elements of an effective operational risk management framework.
2.5

Ideally, the organizational set-up for operational risk management should

include the following:
 Board of Directors
 Risk Management Committee of the Board
 Operational Risk Management Committee
 Operational Risk Management Department
 Operational Risk Managers
 Support Group for operational risk management

2.6

A typical organisation chart for supporting operational risk management

function could be as under:
BOARD OF DIRECTORS
(Decide overall risk management policy and strategy)

RISK MANAGEMENT COMMITTEE
Board Sub-Committee including CEO and Heads of Credit,
Market and Operational Risk Management Committees
(Policy and Strategy for Integrated Risk Management)

CREDIT RISK
MANAGEMENT
COMMITTEE

MARKET RISK
MANAGEMENT
COMMITTEE

OPERATIONAL RISK
MANAGEMENT
COMMITTEE

Chief Risk Officer

Credit Risk
Management
Department

Operational Risk
Management
Department

Business Operational
Risk Manager

Operational Risk
Management
Specialist

Market Risk
Management
Department

Department Heads

It has to be ensured that each type of major risk viz. Credit Risk, Market Risk and
Operational Risk, is managed as an independent function. Hence, banks should
have corresponding risk management committees, which are assigned the
specific responsibilities. Banks may structure the risk management department(s)
as appropriate without compromising on the above principles.

Board Responsibilities:
2.7

Board of Directors of a bank is primarily responsible for ensuring effective

management of operational risks. The Board would include Committee of the
Board to which the Board may delegate specific operational risk management
responsibilities:


The Board of Directors should be aware of the major aspects of the bank’s
operational risks as a distinct risk category that should be managed, and it
should approve an appropriate operational risk management framework for
the bank and review it periodically.



The Board of Directors should provide senior management with clear
guidance and direction.



The Framework should be based on appropriate definition of operational
risk which clearly articulates what constitutes operational risk in the bank
and covers the bank’s appetite and tolerance for operational risk. The
framework should also articulate the key processes the bank needs to
have in place to manage operational risk.



The Board of Directors should be responsible for establishing a
management structure capable of implementing the bank's operational risk
management framework. Since a significant aspect of managing
operational risk relates to the establishment of strong internal controls, it is
particularly important that the Board establishes clear lines of management
responsibility, accountability and reporting. In addition, there should be
separation of responsibilities and reporting lines between operational risk
control functions, business lines and support functions in order to avoid
conflicts of interest.



Board shall review the framework regularly to ensure that the bank is
managing the operational risks arising from external market changes and
other environmental factors, as well as those operational risks associated
with new products, activities or systems. This review process should also
aim to assess industry best practice in operational risk management
appropriate for the bank’s activities, systems and processes. If necessary,
the Board should ensure that the operational risk management framework
is revised in light of this analysis, so that material operational risks are
captured within.



Board should ensure that the bank has in place adequate internal audit
coverage to satisfy itself that policies and procedures have been
implemented effectively. The operational risk management framework
should be subjected to an effective and comprehensive internal audit by
operationally independent, appropriately trained and competent staff. The
internal audit function should not directly involved in the operational risk
management process. Though, in smaller banks, the internal audit function
may be responsible for developing the operational risk management

programme, responsibility for day-to-day operational risk management
should be transferred elsewhere.

Senior Management Responsibilities
2.8 Senior management should have responsibility for implementing the
operational risk management framework approved by the Board of Directors. The
framework should be consistently implemented throughout the whole banking
organisation, and all levels of staff should understand their responsibilities with
respect to operational risk management.

The additional responsibilities that

devolve on the senior management include the following:


To translate operational risk management framework established by the
Board of Directors into specific policies, processes and procedures that
can be implemented and verified within the different business units.



To clearly assign authority, responsibility and reporting relationships to
encourage and maintain this accountability, and ensure that the necessary
resources are available to manage operational risk effectively.



To assess the appropriateness of the management oversight process in
light of the risks inherent in a business unit’s policy.



To ensure bank’s activities are conducted by qualified staff with the
necessary experience, technical capabilities and access to resources, and
that staff responsible for monitoring and enforcing compliance with the
institution’s risk policy have authority independent from the units they
oversee.



To ensure that the bank’s operational risk management policy has been
clearly communicated to staff at all levels in the units that incur material
operational risk.



To ensure that staff responsible for managing operational risk
communicate effectively with staff responsible for managing credit, market,
and other risks as well as with those in the bank who are responsible for
the procurement of external services such as insurance purchasing and
outsourcing agreements. Failure to do so could result in significant gaps or
overlaps in a bank’s overall risk management programme.



To give particular attention to the quality of documentation controls and
transaction-handling practices. Policies, processes and procedures related
to advanced technologies supporting high transaction volumes, in
particular, should be well documented and disseminated to all relevant
personnel.



2.9

To ensure that the bank's HR policies are consistent with its appetite for
risk and are not aligned to rewarding staff who deviate from policies.

The broad indicative role of each organisational arm of the risk

management structure both at the corporate level and at the functional level is
indicated in brief in Annex 1. These can be customised to the actual requirements
of each bank depending upon the size, risk profile, risk appetite and level of
sophistication.

Chapter 3
Policy Requirements and Strategic Approach

3.1

The operational risk management framework provides the strategic

direction and ensures that an effective operational risk management and
measurement process is adopted throughout the institution. Each institution's
operational risk profile is unique and requires a tailored risk management
approach appropriate for the scale and materiality of the risk present, and the size
of the institution. There is no single framework that would suit every institution;
different approaches will be needed for different institutions. In fact, many
operational risk management techniques continue to evolve rapidly to keep pace
with new technologies, business models and applications. Operation risk is more
a risk management than measurement issue. The key elements in the Operational
Risk Management process include –
•
•
•
•
•

Appropriate policies and procedures;
Efforts to identify and measure operational risk
Effective monitoring and reporting
A sound system of internal controls; and
Appropriate testing and verification of the Operational Risk
Framework.

Policy Requirement
3.2

Each bank must have policies and procedures that clearly describe the

major elements of the Operational Risk Management framework including
identifying, assessing, monitoring and controlling / mitigating operational risk.
3.3

Operational Risk Management policies, processes, and procedures should

be documented and communicated to appropriate staff i.e., the personnel at all
levels in units that incur material operational risks. The policies and procedures
should outline all aspects of the institution's Operational Risk Management
framework, including: •

The roles and responsibilities of the independent bank-wide Operational Risk
Management function and line of business management.

•

A definition for operational risk, including the loss event types that will be
monitored.

•

The capture and use of internal and external operational risk loss data
including data potential events (including the use of Scenario analysis).

•

The development and incorporation of business environment and internal
control factor assessments into the operational risk framework.

•

A description of the internally derived analytical framework that quantifies the
operational risk exposure of the institution.

•

A discussion of qualitative factors and risk mitigants and how they are
incorporated into the operational risk framework.

•

A discussion of the testing and verification processes and procedures.

•

A discussion of other factors that affect the measurement of operational risk.

•

Provisions for the review and approval of significant policy and procedural
exceptions.

•

Regular reporting of critical risk issues facing the banks and its
control/mitigations to senior management and Board.

•

Top-level reviews of the bank's progress towards the stated objectives.

•

Checking for compliance with management controls.

•

Provisions for review, treatment and resolution of non-compliance issues.

•

A system of documented approvals and authorisations
accountability at an appropriate level of management.

•

Define the risk tolerance level for the bank, break it down to appropriate sublimits and prescribe reporting levels and breach of limits.

•

Indicate the process to be adopted for immediate corrective action.

3.4

to

ensure

Given the vast advantages associated with effective Operational Risk

Management, it is imperative that the strategic approach of the risk management
function should be oriented towards:
•

An emphasis on minimising and eventually eliminating losses and customer
dissatisfaction due to failures in processes.

•

Focus on flaws in products and their design that can expose the institution to
losses due to fraud etc.

•

Align business structures and incentive systems to minimize conflicts between
employees and the institution.

•

Analyze the impact of failures in technology / systems and develop mitigants to
minimize the impact.

•

Develop plans for external shocks that can adversely impact the continuity in
the institution’s operations.

3.5 The institution can decide upon the mitigants for minimizing operational risks
rationally, by looking at the costs of putting in mitigants as against the benefit of
reducing the operational losses.

Chapter 4
Identification and Assessment of Operational Risk
4.1

In the past, banks relied almost exclusively upon internal control

mechanisms within business lines, supplemented by the audit function, to manage
operational risk. While these remain important, there is need to adopt specific
structures and processes aimed at managing operational risk. Several recent
cases demonstrate that inadequate internal controls can lead to significant losses
for banks. The types of control break-downs may be grouped into five categories:

4.2



Lack of Control Culture - Management’s inattention and laxity in control
culture, insufficient guidance and lack of clear management accountability.



Inadequate recognition and assessment of the risk of certain banking
activities, whether on-or-off-balance sheet. Failure to recognise and
assess the risks of new products and activities or update the risk
assessment when significant changes occur in business conditions or
environment. Many recent cases highlight the fact that control systems
that function well for traditional or simple products are unable to handle
more sophisticated or complex products.



Absence/failure of key control structures and activities, such as
segregation of duties, approvals, verifications, reconciliations and reviews
of operating performance.



Inadequate communication of information between levels
management within the bank – upward, downward or cross-functional.



Inadequate / ineffective audit/monitoring programs.

of

Managing Operational Risk is emerging as an important feature of sound

risk management practice in modern financial markets in the wake of phenomenal
increase in volume of transactions, high degree of structural changes and
complex technological support systems. Some of the guiding principles for banks
to mange operational risks are identification, assessment, monitoring and control
of these risks. These principles are dealt in detail below:
Identification of operational risk
4.3

Banks should identify and assess the operational risk inherent in all

material products, activities, processes and systems. Banks should also ensure

that before new products, activities, processes and systems are introduced or
undertaken, the operational risk inherent in them is identified clearly and
subjected to adequate assessment procedures.
4.4

Risk identification is paramount for the subsequent development of a

viable operational risk monitoring and control system. Effective risk identification
should consider both internal factors (such as the bank’s structure, the nature of
the bank’s activities, the quality of the bank’s human resources, organisational
changes and employee turnover) and external factors (such as changes in the
industry and technological advances) that could adversely affect the achievement
of the bank’s objectives.

4.5

The first step towards identifying risk events is to list out all the activities

that are susceptible to operational risk.

Usually this is carried out at several

stages. To begin with, we can list:
•

The main business groups viz. corporate finance, trading and sales,
retail banking, commercial banking, payment and settlement, agency
services, asset management, and retail brokerage.

•

The analysis can be further carried out at the level of the product
teams in these business groups, e.g. transaction banking, trade
finance, general banking, cash management and securities markets.

•

Thereafter the product offered within these business groups by each
product team can be analysed, e.g. import bills, letter of credit, bank
guarantee under trade finance.

4.6

After the products are listed, the various operational risk events associated

with these products are recorded. An operational risk event is an incident/
experience that has caused or has the potential to cause material loss to the bank
either directly or indirectly with other incidents. Risk events are associated with
the people, process and technology involved with the product. They can be
recognized by:
(i)
(ii)

Experience - The event has occurred in the past;
Judgment - Business logic suggests that the bank is exposed to a risk
event;

(iii)

Intuition - Events where appropriate measures saved the institution in
the nick of time;

(iv)

Linked Events - This event resulted in a loss resulting from other risk
type (credit, market etc.);

(v)

Regulatory requirement – regulator requires recognition of specified
events.

4.7

These risk events can be catalogued under the last tier for each of the

products.

Assessment of Operational Risk
4.8

In addition to identifying the risk events, banks should assess their

vulnerability to these risk events. Effective risk assessment allows a bank to
better understand its risk profile and most effectively target risk management
resources. Amongst the possible tools that may be used by banks for assessing
operational risk are:


Self Risk Assessment: A bank assesses its operations and activities
against a menu of potential operational risk vulnerabilities. This process is
internally driven and often incorporates checklists and/or workshops to
identify the strengths and weaknesses of the operational risk environment.
Scorecards, for example, provide a means of translating qualitative
assessments into quantitative metrics that give a relative ranking of
different types of operational risk exposures. Some scores may relate to
risks unique to a specific business line while others may rank risks that cut
across business lines. Scores may address inherent risks, as well as the
controls to mitigate them.



Risk Mapping: In this process, various business units, organisational
functions or process flows are mapped by risk type. This exercise can
reveal areas of weakness and help prioritise subsequent management
action.



Key Risk Indicators: Key risk indicators are statistics and/or metrics, often
financial, which can provide insight into a bank’s risk position. These
indicators should be reviewed on a periodic basis (such as monthly or
quarterly) to alert banks to changes that may be indicative of risk concerns.
Such indicators may include the number of failed trades, staff turnover
rates and the frequency and/or severity of errors and omissions.

Measurement:
4.9

A key component of risk management is measuring the size and scope of

the bank’s risk exposures. As yet, however, there is no clearly established, single
way to measure operational risk on a bank-wide basis. Banks may develop risk
assessment techniques that are appropriate to the size and complexities of their
portfolio, their resources and data availability. A good assessment model must
cover certain standard features. An example is the “matrix” approach in which
losses are categorized according to the type of event and the business line in
which the event occurred. Banks may quantify their exposure to operational risk
using a variety of approaches. For example, data on a bank’s historical loss
experience could provide meaningful information for assessing the bank’s
exposure to operational risk and developing a policy to mitigate/control the risk.
An effective way of making good use of this information is to establish a
framework for systematically tracking and recording the frequency and severity of
each loss event along with other relevant information on individual loss events. In
this way, a bank can hope to identify events which have the most impact across
the entire bank and business practices which are most susceptible to operational
risk. Once loss events and actual losses are defined, a bank can analyze and
perhaps even model their occurrence. Doing so requires constructing databases
for monitoring such losses and creating risk indicators that summarize these data.
Examples of such indicators are the number of failed transactions over a period
of time and the frequency of staff turnover within a division.

4.10

Every risk event in the risk matrix is then classified according to its

frequency and severity. By frequency, the reference is to the number/ potential
number (proportion) of error events that the product type / risk type point is
exposed to. By severity, the reference is to the loss amount/ potential loss
amount that the operational risk event is exposed to when the risk event
materializes. The classification can be on any predefined scale (say 1-10, Low,
Medium, High etc.). All risk events will thus be under one of the four categories,
namely high frequency-high severity, high frequency-low severity, low frequencyhigh severity, low frequency-low severity in the decreasing order of the risk
exposure.

4.11

Potential losses can be categorized broadly as arising from “high

frequency, low severity” (HFLS) events, such as minor accounting errors or bank
teller mistakes, and “low frequency, high severity” (LFHS) events, such as
terrorist attacks or major fraud. Data on losses arising from HFLS events are
generally available from a bank’s internal auditing systems. Hence, modeling and
budgeting these expected future losses due to operational risk potentially could
be done very accurately. However, LFHS events are uncommon and thus limit a
single bank from having sufficient data for modeling purposes. Scenario analysis
can be used for filling up scarce data. Scenarios can be treated as potential future
events which need to be captured in terms of their potential frequency and
potential loss severity. Scenarios should be generated for all material operational
risks faced by all the organizational units of the bank. An assessment of the
generated scenarios is carried out by the business experts based on the
information such as historical losses, key risk indicators, insurance coverage, risk
factors and the control environment, etc. The above assessments are subjected
to data quality check which may be based on a peer review of the estimates
made by the business expert, internal audit, etc. The data can be fed into an
internal model for generating economic capital requirements for operational risk.

4.12

Risk assessment should also identify and evaluate the internal and external

factors that could adversely affect the bank’s performance, information and
compliance by covering all risks faced by the bank that operate at all levels within
the bank. Assessment should take account of both historical and potential risk
events.
4.13

Historical risk events are assessed based on:

(i)

Total number of risk events

(ii)

Total financial reversals

(iii)

Net financial impact

(iv)

Exposure: Based on expected increase in volumes

(v)

Total number of customer claims paid out

(vi)

IT indices: Uptime etc.

(vii)

Office Accounts Status.

4.14

The factors for assessing potential risks include:

(i)

Staff related factors such as productivity, expertise, turnover

(ii)

Extent of activity outsourced

(iii)

Process clarity, complexity, changes

(iv)

IT Indices

(v)

Audit Scores

(vi)

Expected changes or spurts in volumes

CHAPTER 5
Monitoring of Operational Risk
5.1

An effective monitoring process is essential for adequately managing

operational risk. Regular monitoring activities can offer the advantage of quickly
detecting and correcting deficiencies in the policies, processes and procedures
for managing operational risk. Promptly detecting and addressing these
deficiencies can substantially reduce the potential frequency and/or severity of a
loss event.
5.2

In addition to monitoring operational loss events, banks should identify

appropriate indicators that provide early warning of an increased risk of future
losses. Such indicators (often referred to as early warning indicators) should be
forward-looking and could reflect potential sources of operational risk such as
rapid growth, the introduction of new products, employee turnover, transaction
breaks, system downtime, and so on. When thresholds are directly linked to these
indicators, an effective monitoring process can help identify key material risks in a
transparent manner and enable the bank to act upon these risks appropriately.
5.3

The frequency of monitoring should reflect the risks involved and the

frequency and nature of changes in the operating environment. Monitoring should
be an integrated part of a bank’s activities. The results of these monitoring
activities should be included in regular management and Board reports, as should
compliance reviews performed by the internal audit and/or risk management
functions. Reports generated by (and/or for) intermediary supervisory authorities
may also inform the corporate monitoring unit which should likewise be reported
internally to senior management and the Board, where appropriate.
5.4

Senior management should receive regular reports from appropriate areas

such as business units, group functions, the operational risk management unit
and internal audit. The operational risk reports should contain internal financial,
operational, and compliance data, as well as external market information about
events and conditions that are relevant to decision making. Reports should be
distributed to appropriate levels of management and to areas of the bank on
which areas of concern may have an impact. Reports should fully reflect any

identified problem areas and should motivate timely corrective action on
outstanding issues. To ensure the usefulness and reliability of these risk reports
and audit reports, management should regularly verify the timeliness, accuracy,
and relevance of reporting systems and internal controls in general. Management
may also use reports prepared by external sources (auditors, supervisors) to
assess the usefulness and reliability of internal reports. Reports should be
analysed with a view to improving existing risk management performance as well
as developing new risk management policies, procedures and practices.

Management information systems
5.5

Banks should implement a process to regularly monitor operational risk

profiles and material exposures to losses. There should be regular reporting of
pertinent information to senior management and the Board of Directors that
supports the proactive management of operational risk. In general, the Board of
Directors should receive sufficient higher-level information to enable them to
understand the bank’s overall operational risk profile and focus on the material
and strategic implications for the business. Towards this end it would be relevant
to identify all activities and all loss events in a bank under well defined business
lines.

Business Line Identification
5.6

Banks have different business mixes and risk profiles. Hence the most

intractable problem banks face in assessing operational risk capital is due to this
diversity. The best way to get around this intractable problem in computation is by
specifying a range of operational risk multipliers for specified distinct business
lines. The following benefits are expected to accrue by specifying business lines:
 banks will be able to crystallise the assessment processes to the
underlying operational risk and the regulatory framework;
 the line managers will be aware of operational risk in their line of
business;
 confusion and territorial overlap which may be linked to subsets of the
overall risk profile of a bank can be avoided.

5.7

For the purpose of operational risk management, the activities of a bank

may be mapped into eight business lines identified in the New Capital Adequacy
Framework. The various products launched by the banks are also to be mapped
to the relevant business line. Banks must develop specific policies for mapping a
product or an activity to a business line and have the same documented to
indicate the criteria. The following are the eight recommended business lines.
Details and methodologies for mapping of these business lines are furnished in
Annex 2.
1. Corporate finance
2. Trading and sales
3. Retail banking
4. Commercial banking
5. Payment and settlement
6. Agency services
7. Asset management
8. Retail brokerage
5.8

The following are the principles to be followed for business line mapping:

(i)

All activities must be mapped into the eight level - 1 business lines in a
mutually exclusive and jointly exhaustive manner.

(ii)

Any banking or non banking activity which cannot be readily mapped into
the business line framework, but which represents an ancillary function to
an activity included in the framework, must be allocated to the business line
it supports. If more than one business line is supported through the
ancillary activity, an objective mapping criteria must be used.

(iii)

The mapping of activities into business lines for operational risk
management must be consistent with the definitions of business lines used
for management of other risk categories, i.e. credit and market risk. Any
deviations from this principle must be clearly motivated and documented.

(iv)

The mapping process used must be clearly documented. In particular,
written business line definitions must be clear and detailed enough to allow
third parties to replicate the business line mapping. Documentation must,
among other things, clearly motivate any exceptions or overrides and be
kept on record.

(v)

Processes must be in place to define the mapping of any new activities or
products.

(vi)

Senior management is responsible for the mapping policy (which is subject
to approval by the Board of Directors).

(vii)

The mapping process to business lines must be subject to independent
review.

5.9 The following principles might be relevant for determining mapping of
activities into appropriate business lines:
i) activities that constitute compound activities may be broken up into their
components which might be related to the level 2 activities under the eight
business lines and these components of the complex activity may be
assigned to the most suitable business lines, in accordance with their
nature and characteristics.
ii) activities that refer to more than a business line may be assigned to the
most predominant business line and if no predominant business line exist,
then it may be mapped to the most suitable business lines, in accordance
with their nature and characteristics.

Operational Risk Loss events
5.10 Banks must meet the following data requirement for internally generating
operational risk measures.


The tracking of individual internal event data is an essential prerequisite to
the development and functioning of operational risk measurement system.
Internal loss data is crucial for tying a bank’s risk estimates to its actual
loss experience.



Internal loss data is most relevant when it is clearly linked to a bank’s
current business activities, technological process and risk management
procedures. Therefore, bank must have documented procedures for
assessing on-going relevance of historical loss data, including those
situations in which judgement overrides, scaling, or other adjustments may
be used, to what extent it may used and who is authorised to make such
decisions.



Bank’s internal loss data must be comprehensive in that it captures all
material activities and exposures from all appropriate sub-systems and
geographic locations. A bank must be able to justify that any activities and
exposures excluded would not have a significant impact on the overall risk
estimates. Bank may have appropriate de minimis gross loss threshold for
internal loss data collection, say Rs.10, 000. The appropriate threshold may
vary somewhat between banks and within a bank across business lines
and / or event types. However, particular thresholds may be broadly
consistent with those used by the peer banks. Measuring Operational Risk

requires both estimating the probability of an operational loss event and the
severity of the loss.


Banks must track actual loss data (i.e., where losses have actually
materialised) and map the same into the relevant level 1 category defined
in Annex 3. Banks must endeavour to map the actual loss events to level 3.
Operational risk loss would be the financial impact associated with the
operational event that is recorded in the financial statement and would
include for example, (a) loss incurred, and (b) expenditure incurred to
resume normal functioning, but would not include opportunity costs and
foregone revenue etc. However, the banks must also track the potential
loss (i.e. extent to which further loss may be incurred due to the same
operational risk event), near misses, attempted frauds, etc where no loss
has actually been incurred by the bank, from the point of view of
strengthening the internal systems and controls and avoiding the possibility
of such events turning into actual operational risk losses in future.



Aside from information on gross loss amounts, bank should collect
information about the data of the event, any recoveries, as well as some
descriptive information about the cause/drivers of the loss event. The level
of descriptive information should be commensurate with the size of the
gross loss amount.



Bank must develop specific criteria for assigning loss data arising from an
event in a centralised function (e.g. information technology, administration
department etc.) or any activity that spans more than one business line.



External loss data – bank may also collect external loss data to the extent
possible. External loss data should include data on actual loss amounts,
information on scale of business operations where the event occurred,
information on causes and circumstances of the loss events or any other
relevant information. Bank must develop systematic process for
determining the situations for which external data should be used and the
methodologies used to incorporate the data.



The loss data collected must be analysed loss event category and
business line wise. Banks to look into the process and plug any
deficiencies in the process and take remedial steps to reduce such events.

CHAPTER 6
Controls / Mitigation of Operational Risk
6.1 Risk management is the process of mitigating the risks faced by a bank. With
regard to operational risk, several methods may be adopted for mitigating the risk.
For example, losses that might arise on account of natural disasters can be
insured against. Losses that might arise from business disruptions due to
telecommunication or electrical failures can be mitigated by establishing
redundant backup facilities. Loss due to internal factors, like employee fraud or
product flaws, which may be difficult to identify and insure against, can be
mitigated through strong internal auditing procedures.

6.2

Although a framework of formal, written policies and procedures is critical, it

needs to be reinforced through a strong control culture that promotes sound risk
management practices. Both the Board of Directors and senior management are
responsible for establishing a strong internal control culture in which control
activities are an integral part of the regular activities of a bank, since such
integration enables quick responses to changing conditions and avoids
unnecessary costs.
6.3

A system of effective internal controls is a critical component of bank

management and a foundation for the safe and sound operation of banking
organisations. Such a system can also help to ensure that the bank will comply
with laws and regulations as well as policies, plans, internal rules and procedures,
and decrease the risk of unexpected losses or damage to the bank’s reputation.
Internal control is a process effected by the Board of Directors, senior
management and all levels of personnel. It is not solely a procedure or policy that
is performed at a certain point in time, but rather it is continually operating at all
levels within the bank.

6.4

The internal control process, which historically has been a mechanism for

reducing instances of fraud, misappropriation and errors, has become more
extensive, addressing all the various risks faced by banking organisations. It is

now recognised that a sound internal control process is critical to a bank’s ability
to meet its established goals, and to maintain its financial viability.

6.5

In varying degrees, internal control is the responsibility of everyone in a

bank. Almost all employees produce information used in the internal control
system or take other actions needed to effect control. An essential element of a
strong internal control system is the recognition by all employees of the need to
carry out their responsibilities effectively and to communicate to the appropriate
level of management any problems in operations, instances of non-compliance
with the code of conduct, or other policy violations or illegal actions that are
noticed. It is essential that all personnel within the bank understand the
importance of internal control and are actively engaged in the process. While
having a strong internal control culture does not guarantee that an organisation
will reach its goals, the lack of such a culture provides greater opportunities for
errors to go undetected or for improprieties to occur.

6.6

An effective internal control system requires that
•

an appropriate control structure is set up, with control activities defined at
every business level. These should include: top level reviews; appropriate
activity controls for different departments or divisions; physical controls;
checking for compliance with exposure limits and follow-up on noncompliance; a system of approvals and authorisations; and, a system of
verification and reconciliation.

•

there is appropriate segregation of duties and personnel are not assigned
conflicting responsibilities. Areas of potential conflicts of interest should be
identified, minimised, and subject to careful, independent monitoring.

•

there are adequate and comprehensive internal financial, operational and
compliance data, as well as external market information about events and
conditions that are relevant to decision making. Information should be
reliable, timely, accessible, and provided in a consistent format.

•

there are reliable information systems in place that cover all significant
activities of the bank. These systems, including those that hold and use

data in an electronic form, must be secure, monitored independently and
supported by adequate contingency arrangements.
•

effective channels of communication to ensure that all staff fully understand
and adhere to policies and procedures affecting their duties and
responsibilities and that other relevant information is reaching the
appropriate personnel.

6.7

Adequate

internal

controls

within

banking

organisations

must

be

supplemented by an effective internal audit function that independently evaluates
the control systems within the organisation. Internal audit is part of the ongoing
monitoring of the bank's system of internal controls and of its internal capital
assessment procedure, because internal audit provides an independent
assessment of the adequacy of, and compliance with, the bank’s established
policies and procedures.

6.8

Operational risk can be more pronounced where banks engage in new

activities or develop new products (particularly where these activities or products
are not consistent with the bank’s core business strategies), enter unfamiliar
markets, and/or engage in businesses that are geographically distant from the
head office. It is incumbent upon banks to ensure that special attention is paid to
internal control activities where such conditions exist.

6.9

In some instances, banks may decide to either retain a certain level of

operational risk or self-insure against that risk. Where this is the case and the risk
is material, the decision to retain or self-insure the risk should be transparent
within the organisation and should be consistent with the bank’s overall business
strategy and appetite for risk. The bank’s appetite as specified through the policies
for managing this risk and the bank’s prioritisation of operational risk management
activities, including the extent of, and manner in which, operational risk is
transferred outside the bank. The degree of formality and sophistication of the
bank’s operational risk management framework should be commensurate with the
bank’s risk profile.

6.10

Banks should have policies, processes and procedures to control and/or

mitigate material operational risks. Banks should periodically review their risk
limitation and control strategies and should adjust their operational risk profile
accordingly using appropriate strategies, in light of their overall risk appetite and
profile.


For all material operational risks that have been identified, the bank should
decide whether to use appropriate procedures to control and/or mitigate
the risks, or bear the risks. For those risks that cannot be controlled, the
bank should decide whether to accept these risks, reduce the level of
business activity involved, or withdraw from this activity completely. Control
processes and procedures should be established and banks should have a
system in place for ensuring compliance with a documented set of internal
policies.



Some significant operational risks have low probabilities but potentially
very large financial impact. Classification of operational loss event into
various risk categories based on frequency and severity matrix
prioritise the events to be controlled and tracked. Audit benchmarks can be
set for high loss events. Moreover, not all risk events can be controlled
(e.g., natural disasters). Risk mitigation tools or programmes can be used
to reduce the exposure to, or frequency and/or severity of, such events.
For example, insurance policies, particularly those with prompt and certain
pay-out features, can be used to externalise the risk of “low frequency,
high severity” losses which may occur as a result of events such as thirdparty claims resulting from errors and omissions, physical loss of
securities, employee or third-party fraud, and natural disasters.



However, banks should view risk mitigation tools as complementary to,
rather than a replacement for, internal operational risk control. Having
mechanisms in place to quickly recognise and rectify legitimate operational
risk errors can greatly reduce exposures. Careful consideration also needs
to be given to the extent to which risk mitigation tools such as insurance
truly reduce risk, or transfer the risk to another business sector or area, or
even create a new risk (e.g. legal or counterparty risk).



Investment in appropriate processing technology and information
technology security are also important for risk mitigation. However, banks
should be aware that increased automation could transform high
frequency-low severity losses into low frequency-high severity losses. The
latter may be associated with loss or extended disruption of services
caused by internal factors or by factors beyond the bank’s immediate
control (e.g., external events). Such problems may cause serious
difficulties for banks and could jeopardise an institution’s ability to conduct
key business activities. Banks should establish disaster recovery and
business continuity plans that address this risk.



Banks should also establish policies for managing risks associated with
outsourcing activities. Outsourcing of activities can reduce the institution’s
risk profile by transferring activities to others with greater expertise and
scale to manage the risks associated with specialised business activities.
However, a bank’s use of third parties does not diminish the responsibility
of management to ensure that the third-party activity is conducted in a safe
and sound manner and in compliance with applicable laws. Outsourcing
arrangements should be based on robust contracts and/or service level
agreements that ensure a clear allocation of responsibilities between
external service providers and the outsourcing bank. Furthermore, banks
need to manage residual risks associated with outsourcing arrangements,
including disruption of services



Depending on the scale and nature of the activity, banks should
understand the potential impact on their operations and their customers of
any potential deficiencies in services provided by vendors and other thirdparty or intra-group service providers, including both operational
breakdowns and the potential business failure or default of the external
parties. Banks should ensure that the expectations and obligations of each
party are clearly defined, understood and enforceable. The extent of the
external party’s liability and financial ability to compensate the bank for
errors, negligence, and other operational failures should be explicitly
considered as part of the risk assessment. Banks should carry out an initial
due diligence test and monitor the activities of third party providers,
especially those lacking experience of the banking industry’s regulated
environment, and review this process (including re-evaluations of due
diligence) on a regular basis. For critical activities, the bank may need to
consider contingency plans, including the availability of alternative external
parties and the costs and resources required to switch external parties,
potentially on very short notice.



Banks should have in place contingency and business continuity plans to
ensure their ability to operate on an ongoing basis and limit losses in the
event of severe business disruption. These plans needs to be stresstested annually and the plans may be revised to appropriately address any
new or previously unaddressed parameters for these plans. For reasons
that may be beyond a bank’s control, a severe event may result in the
inability of the bank to fulfil some or all of its business obligations,
particularly where the bank’s physical, telecommunication, or information
technology infrastructures have been damaged or made inaccessible. This
can, in turn, result in significant financial losses to the bank, as well as
broader disruptions to the financial system through channels such as the
payments system. This potential requires that banks establish disaster
recovery and business continuity plans that take into account different
types of plausible scenarios to which the bank may be vulnerable,
commensurate with the size and complexity of the bank’s operations.



Banks should periodically review their disaster recovery and business
continuity plans so that they are consistent with the bank’s current
operations and business strategies. Moreover, these plans should be

tested periodically to ensure that the bank would be able to execute the
plans in the unlikely event of a severe business disruption.

Chapter 7
Independent Evaluation of Operational Risk Management Function

7.1

The bank’s Board of Directors has the ultimate responsibility for ensuring

that senior management establishes and maintains an adequate and effective
system of internal controls, a measurement system for assessing the various risks
of the bank’s activities, a system for relating risks to the bank’s capital level, and
appropriate methods for monitoring compliance with laws, regulations, and
supervisory and internal policies.
7.2

Internal audit is part of the ongoing monitoring of the bank's system of

internal controls because internal audit provides an independent assessment of
the adequacy of, and compliance with, the bank’s established policies and
procedures. As such, the internal audit function assists senior management and
the Board of Directors in the efficient and effective discharge of their
responsibilities as described above. Banks should have in place adequate internal
audit coverage to verify that operating policies and procedures have been
implemented effectively. The Board (either directly or indirectly through its Audit
Committee) should ensure that the scope and frequency of the audit programme
is appropriate to the risk exposures.
7.3

The scope of internal audit will broadly cover:
 the examination and evaluation of the adequacy and effectiveness of
the internal control systems and the functioning of specific internal control
procedures;
 the review of the application and effectiveness of operational risk
management procedures and risk assessment methodologies;
 the review of the management and financial information systems,
including the electronic information system and electronic banking services;


the review of the means of safeguarding assets;

 the review of the bank’s system of assessing its capital in relation to its
estimate of operational risk;

 the review of the systems established to ensure compliance with legal
and regulatory requirements, codes of conduct and the implementation of
policies and procedures;

7.4



the testing of the reliability and timeliness of the regulatory reporting;



mitigating risks through risk based audit
All functional departments should ensure that the operational risk

management department is kept fully informed of new developments, initiatives,
products and operational changes to ensure that all associated risks are identified
at an early stage.


Operational risk groups are likely to focus on regulatory liaison,
operational risk measures, best practice in areas involving risk
quantification such as model risk, new products approval and optimising
operations and processes. Audit should periodically validate that the
bank’s operational risk management framework is being implemented
effectively across the bank. To the extent that the audit function is
involved in oversight of the operational risk management framework, the
Board should ensure that the independence of the audit function is
maintained. This independence may be compromised if the audit function
is directly involved in the operational risk management process. The audit
function may provide valuable input to those responsible for operational
risk management, but should not itself have direct operational risk
management responsibilities.



Examples of what an independent evaluation of operational risk should
review include the following:




The effectiveness of the bank’s risk management process and overall
control environment with respect to operational risk;



The bank’s methods for monitoring and reporting its operational risk
profile, including data on operational losses and other indicators of
potential operational risk;



The bank’s procedures for the timely and effective resolution of
operational risk events and vulnerabilities;



The effectiveness of the bank’s operational risk mitigation efforts,
such as the use of insurance;



The quality and comprehensiveness of the bank’s disaster recovery
and business continuity plans



To ensure that, where banks are part of a financial group, there are
procedures in place to ensure that operational risk is managed in an
appropriate and integrated manner across the group. In performing

this assessment, cooperation and exchange of information with other
supervisors, in accordance with established procedures, may be
necessary.

Chapter 8
Capital Allocation for Operational Risk
8.1 This Guidance Note is an outline of a set of sound principles for effective
management and supervision of operational risk by banks. As mentioned earlier,
the exact approach may differ among banks and the operational risk management
chosen by a bank would depend on a broad range of factors.
8.2 The Basel Committee has put forward a framework consisting of three options
for calculating operational risk capital charges in a ‘continuum’ of increasing
sophistication and risk sensitivity. These are, in the order of their increasing
complexity, viz., (i) the Basic Indicator Approach (ii) the Standardised Approach
and (iii) Advanced Measurement Approaches. Though the Reserve Bank
proposes to initially allow banks to use the Basic Indicator Approach for computing
regulatory capital for operational risk, some banks are expected to move along the
range toward more sophisticated approaches as they develop more sophisticated
operational risk management systems and practices which meet the prescribed
qualifying criteria. Qualifying criteria for standardised Approach and Advanced
Measurement Approaches are given in the Attachment. In order to have a better
understanding of these approaches, it is suggested that the Attachment should be
read together with the revised Framework.

The Basic Indicator Approach
8.3

Reserve Bank has proposed that, at the minimum, all banks in India should

adopt this approach while computing capital for operational risk while
implementing Basel II. Under the Basic Indicator Approach, banks have to hold
capital for operational risk equal to a fixed percentage (alpha) of a single indicator
which has currently been proposed to be “gross income”. This approach is
available for all banks irrespective of their level of sophistication. The charge may
be expressed as follows:
KBIA = [ ∑ (GI*α) ]/n,
Where
KBIA = the capital charge under the Basic Indicator Approach.

GI = annual gross income, where positive, over the previous three
years
α = 15% set by the Committee, relating the industry-wide level of
required capital to the industry-wide level of the indicator.
n = number of the previous three years for which gross income is
positive.

8.4

The Basel Committee has defined gross income as net interest income and

has allowed each relevant national supervisor to define gross income in
accordance with the prevailing accounting practices. Accordingly, gross income
will be computed for this purpose as defined by the Reserve Bank of India for
implementation of the new capital adequacy framework.

Annex 1
(paragraph 2.9)

Broad indicative role of each organisational arm
of the risk management structure
A. Key functions of Risk Management Committee of Board (RMCB)
•

Approve operational risk policies and issues delegated to it by the Board.

•

Review profiles of operational risk throughout the organization

•

Approve operational risk capital methodology and resulting attribution

•

Set and approve expressions of risk appetite, within overall parameters set by
the Board.

•

Re-enforce the culture and awareness of operational risk management
throughout the organization.

B. Key functions of Operational Risk Management Committee
The Operational Risk Management Committee is an executive committee. It shall
have as its principal objective the mitigation of operational risk within the institution
by the creation and maintenance of an explicit operational risk management
process. The committee will be presented with detailed reviews of operational risk
exposures across the bank.

Its goals are to take a cross-business view and

assure that a proper understanding is reached and actions are being taken to
meet the stated goals and objectives of operational risk management in the bank.
The Committee may meet quarterly, or more often as it determines is necessary.
The meetings will focus on all operational risk issues that the bank faces. Key
roles of the Committee are:
•

Review the risk profile, understand future changes and threats, and concur on
areas of highest priority and related mitigation strategy.

•

Assure adequate resources are being assigned to mitigate risks as needed

•

Communicate to business areas and staff components the importance of
operational risk management, and assure adequate participation and
cooperation

•

Review and approve the development and implementation of operational risk
methodologies and tools, including assessments, reporting, capital and loss
event databases.

•

Receive and review reports/presentations from the business lines and other
areas about their risk profile and mitigation programs.

•

To monitor and ensure that appropriate operational risk management
frameworks are in place.

•

To proactively review and mange potential risks which may arise from
regulatory changes/or changes in economic /political environment in order to
keep ahead.

•

To discuss and recommend suitable controls/mitigations for managing
operational risk.

•

To analyse frauds, potential losses, non compliance, breaches etc. and
recommend corrective measures to prevent recurrences.

•

To discuss any issues arising / directions in any one business unit/product
which may impact the risks of other business/products.

•

To continually promote risk awareness across all business units so that
complacency does not set in.

C. Key functions of Operational Risk Management Department (ORMD)
The ORMD is responsible for coordinating all the operational risk activities of the
Bank, working towards achievement of the stated goals and objectives. Activities
include building an understanding of the risk profile, implementing tools related to
operational risk management, and working towards the goals of improved controls
and lower risk. ORMD works with the operational liaisons within the business
units, staff areas and with the corporate management staff.

The group is

organized within the Risk Management function. Specific activities of the ORMD
include:
•

Risk Profile – ORMD will work with all areas of the bank and assemble
information to build an overall risk profile of the institution, understand and
communicate these risks, and analyze changes/trends in the risk profile.
ORMD will utilize the following four-pronged approach to develop these
profiles:
• Risk Indicators
• Self-Assessment

•
•

Loss Database
Capital Model

•

Tools – ORMD is responsible for the purchase or development and
implementation of tools that the Bank will use in its operational risk
management program.

•

Capital – ORMD is jointly responsible with the department involved in capital
management for development of a capital measurement methodology for
operational risks. It will also coordinate the assembly of required inputs,
documentation of assumptions, gaining consensus with the business areas,
and coordination with other areas of the bank for the use of the results in the
strategic planning, performance measurement, cost benefit analysis, and
pricing processes.

•

Consolidation and Reporting of Data – ORMD will collect relevant
information from all areas of the bank, build a consolidated view of operational
risk, assemble summary management reports and communicate the results to
the risk committees or other interested parties. Key information will include
risk indicators, event data and self-assessment results and related issues.

•

Analysis of Data – ORMD is responsible to analyze the data on a
consolidated basis, on an individual basis and on a comparative basis.

•

Best Practices – ORMD will identify best practices from within the bank or
from external sources and share these practices with management and risk
specialists across the Bank as beneficial. As part of this role, they will
participate in industry conferences surveys, keep up to date on rules and
regulations, monitor trends and practices in the industry, and maintain a
database/library of articles on the subject.

•

Advice/Consultation – ORMD will be responsible for working with the Risk
Specialists and the businesses as a team to provide advice on how to apply
the operational risk management framework, identify operational risks and
work on solving problems and improving the risk profile of the Bank.

•

Insurance – ORMD will work with the Bank’s insurance area to determine
optimal insurance limits and coverage to assure that the insurance policies the
bank purchases are cost beneficial and align with the operational risk profiles
of the Bank.

•

Policies – ORMD will be responsible for drafting, presenting, updating and
interpreting, the Operational Risk Policy.

•

Self-Assessment – ORMD will be responsible for facilitating periodic selfassessments for the purpose of identifying and monitoring operational risks.

•

Coordination with Internal Audit –ORMD will work closely with Internal Audit
to plan assessments and concerns about risks in the Bank. ORMD and

Internal Audit will share information and coordinate activities so as to minimize
potential overlap of activities.
D. Key functions of Chief Risk Officer (CRO)
The CRO has supervisory responsibilities over the Operational Risk Management
Department as well as responsibility over market risk and credit risk:
•

Review Recommendations –The CRO will supervise the activities and review
and approve the recommendations of the ORMD before submission to the
Operational Risk Committee or Risk Management Committee.

•

Assess interrelationships between Operational, and other risk types –
The CRO will facilitate the analysis of risks and interrelationships of risks
across market, credit and operational risks. The CRO will assure
communication between risk functions and that risk measures and economic
capital measures reflect any interrelationships.

•

Create Awareness – The CRO will help assure that line and executive
management maintains an ongoing understanding of operational risks and
participates in related risk management activities.

E. Key function of Operational Risk Management Specialists
The bank-wide support departments (e.g., Legal, Human Resources, and
Information Technology) shall assign a representative(s) to be designated as
Operational Risk Specialists. Their main responsibility is to work with ORMD and
the departments/businesses to identify, analyze, explain and mitigate operational
issues within their respective areas of expertise. They will also act as verifiers for
their related risks in the self assessment process. They will accomplish this
responsibility by involving themselves in the following:
•

Committee Participation – The Operational Risk Management Specialists
shall be members of the committees and task forces related to operational risk
management, as applicable. They must be ready to discuss operational
issues and recommend mitigation strategies.

•

Risk-Indicators – Assist in the development and review of appropriate risk
indicators, both on a bank-wide and business specific basis for their area of
specialty.

•

Self-Assessment – Assist in the review of Self-Assessment results and opine
on the departmental/business assessment of risk types, quantification and
frequency.

•

Loss Database – Assist in the timely identification and recording of
operational loss data and explanations.

•

Gaps/Issues – Ensure that all operational risk issues are brought to the
attention of ORMD and the Department/business.

•

Mitigation – Assist the department/business in the design and implementation
of risk mitigation strategies.

F. Key functions of Business Operational Risk Managers
It is expected that each business/ functional area will appoint a person responsible
to coordinate the management of operational risk. This responsibility may be
assigned to an existing job, be a full time position, or even a team of people, as
the size and complexity justify. Business/Functional areas should determine how
this should be organized within their respective areas. Risk Managers will report to
their respective departments/businesses, but work closely with ORMD and with
consistent tools and risk management framework and policy. The Operational
Risk Management Committee will assure that these liaisons are appointed and
approve their selection. The key responsibilities of the liaisons are:
•

Self-Assessments – Will help facilitate, partake and verify the results of the
self-assessment process.

•

Risk Indicators – Design, collection, reporting, and data capture of risk
indicators and related reports. Liaisons will monitor results and help work with
their respective departments on identified issues. Resulting information will be
distributed to both the departments and ORMD on a timely and accurate basis.

•

Loss Events – Coordinate collection, recording and data capture of loss
events within the businesses and regular reporting of these events, the details,
amounts.

•

Gaps/Issues – Responsible for the timely follow-up, documentation and status
of action plans, open issues (Internal Audit, External Audit, Regulator and
Inspector) and other initiatives waiting to be completed.

•

Committee Participation – Must prepare to be called upon to attend the
Operational Risk Management Committee meetings, when necessary, to
discuss operational risk issues.

•

Risk Mitigation – Responsible for consulting/advising the business units on
ways to mitigate risks. Work with business areas and respective departments
on risk analysis and mitigation.

G. Key functions of Department Heads
Business/Functional area heads are responsible for risk taking, related controls
and mitigation. They are ultimately responsible for implementation of sound risk
management practices and any resulting impact for operational losses.

To

support this responsibility, they will have the following responsibilities related to
operational risk management.
•

Risk Ownership – The department heads shall take ownership of the
operational risks faced in their departments/businesses.

•

Understanding – Understanding the profile of operational risk facing the area
and monitoring changes in the business and risk profile. Department Heads
may be expected to present their risk profiles and action plans to the
Operational Risk Management Committee.

•

Risk Indicators – Collection and Preparation of various risk indicator reports.

•

Loss Events - Identification of loss events within the businesses and regular
reporting of these events, the details, amounts and circumstances to ORMD
on a complete and timely basis.

•

Self-Assessment – Responsible for the periodic completion of selfassessments.

•

Risk Mitigation – The businesses are responsible for developing strategies
for the mitigation of risk where required (or managing those risks deemed to
be acceptable).

ANNEX 2
(Paragraph 5.7)
Mapping of Business Lines

Buisness
Unit
Investment
Banking

Business line
Level 1
Level 2
Corporate Finance
Municipal / government
Corporate
finance
Finance
Merchant Banking
Advisory Services
Sales
Trading and
sales

Banking

Market Making
Proprietary Positions
Treasury
Retail Banking
Private Banking

Retail Banking
Card Services

Agency Services

Others

Asset
Management

Retail Brokerage

Mergers
and
Acquisitions,
Underwriting,
Privatisations,
Securitisation, Research, Debt
(Government, High Yield) Equity,
Syndications,
IPO,
Secondary
Private Placements.
Fixed Income, equity, foreign
exchanges, commodities, credit,
funding, own position securities
lending and repos, brokerage, debt,
prime brokerage.
Retail lending and deposits,
banking services, trust and estates
Private lending and deposits,
banking services, trust and estates,
investment advice.
Merchant/Commercial/Corporate
cards, private labels and retail.

Commercial Banking

Project finance, real estate, export
finance, trade finance, factoring,
leasing, lends, guarantees, bills of
exchange

External Clients

Payments and collections, funds
transfer, clearing and settlement.

Custody

Escrow,
Depository
Receipts,
Securities lending (Customers)
Corporate actions
Issuer and paying agents

Commercial
Banking
Payment and
Settlement

Activity Groups

Corporate Agency
Corporate Trust
Discretionary Fund
Management
Non - Discretionary
Fund Management

Pooled,
segregated,
retail,
institutional, closed, open, private
equity
Pooled,
segregated,
retail,
institutional, closed, open

Retail Brokerage

Execution and full service

ANNEX 3
(Paragraph 5.9 )
Category (Level 1)
Internal Fraud

Loss Event Type Classification
Definition
Category (Level 2)
Lossess due to acts Unauthorized
of a type intended to activity
defraud,
misappropriate
property
or
circumvent
regulations, the law or
company
policy, Theft and Fraud
excluding diversity /
discrimination events,
which involves at
least one internal
party.

Lossess due to acts Theft and Fraud
of a type intended to
defraud,
misappropriate
Systems Security
property
or
circumvent the law, by
a third party.
Lossess arising from Employee Relations
Employment
Practices
and acts inconsistent with
Workplace Safety employment, health or
safety
laws
or
agreements,
from
payment of personal Environmental
injury claims, or from safety
diversity
/
discrimination events.
External Fraud

Category (Level 3)
Transactions
not
reported (intentional)
Trans
type
unauthorized
(monetary loss)
Mismarking
of
position (intentional)
Fraud/ credit fraud
/worthless deposits
Theft / extortion /
embezzlement
/
robbery
Misappropriation
of
assets
Malicious destruction
of assets
Forgery
Check kiting
Smuggling
Account take-over /
impersonation /etc.
Tax non-compliance
/evasion (willful)
Bribes/ kickbacks
Insider trading (not on
bank’s account)
Theft/ robbery
Forgery
Cheque Kiting
Hacking damage
Theft of information
Compensation,
benefit,
termination
issues
Organized
labor
activity
General
liability
(Workplace accidents
- slip & fall etc)
Employee health &
safety rules events

Category (Level 1)

Loss Event Type Classification
Definition
Category (Level 2)

Diversity
discrimination

Category (Level 3)

Workers
compensation
and All
discrimination
types

Clients, Products Lossess arising from Suitability,
&
Business an unintentional or Disclosure
negligent failure to Fiduciary
Practices
meet a professional
obligation to specific
clients
(including
fiduciary
and
suitability
requirements), or from
the nature or design
of a product.

Fiduciary breaches /
& guideline violations
Suitability / disclosure
issues (KYC etc)
Retail
consumer
disclosure violations
Breach of privacy
Aggressive sales
Account churning
Misuse of confidential
information
Lender Liability
Improper Business Antitrust
or Market Practices
Improper
trade
/
market practices
Market manipulation
Insider trading
Unlicensed activity
Money laundering
Product flaws
Product
defects
(unauthorized etc.)
Model errors
Selection,
Failure to investigate
Sponsorship
& client per guidelines
Exposure
Exceeding
client
exposure limits
Advisory activities
Disputes
over
performance
of
advisory activities

disaster
Damage
to Losses arising from Disasters and other Natural
loss or damage to events
losses
physical assets
physical assets from
Human losses from
natural disasters or
external
sources
other events
(terrorism, vandalism)

Category (Level 1)
Business
disruption
&
system failures

Execution,
Delivery
Process
Management

Loss Event Type Classification
Definition
Category (Level 2)
Losses arising from Systems
disruption of business
or system failures

Losses from failed Transaction
Capture, Execution
& transcations
processing or process Maintenance
management,
from
relations with trade
counterparties
and
vendors

Monitoring
Reporting

and

Customer
intake
and documentation

Customer
account
management

client

Trade
Counterparties

Vendors
Suppliers

&

Category (Level 3)
Hardware
Software
Telecommunications
Utility
outrage
/
disruptions

Miscommunication
Data
entry,
maintenance
or
loading error
Missed deadline or
responsibility
Model
/
system
misoperation
Accounting error /
entity attribution error
Other
task
misperformance
Delivery failure
Collateral
management failure
Reference
data
maintenance
Failed
mandatory
reporting obligation
Inaccurate
external
report (loss incurred)
Client
permissions
/disclaimers missing
Legal
documents
missing / incomplete
Unapproved access
given to accounts
Incorrect
client
records (loss incurred)
Negligent
loss
damage
of
client
assets
Non
client
counterparty
misperformance
Misc.
non-client
counterparty disputes
Outsourcing
Vendor disputes

ATTACHMENT
(Paragraph 8.2)
Advanced Measurement Methodologies
It is suggested that for a better comprehension, this attachment should be read
together with the "International Convergence of Capital Measurement and Capital
Standards – A Revised Framework" released by the Basel Committee on Banking
Supervision in June 2004.
The Standardised Approach
2. In the Standardised Approach, banks‘ activities are divided into eight business
lines: corporate finance, trading & sales, retail banking, commercial banking,
payment & settlement, agency services, asset management, and retail brokerage.
The business lines are defined in detail in Annex 3 (Para 5.9).
3. Within each business line, gross income is a broad indicator that serves as a
proxy for the scale of business operations and thus the likely scale of operational
risk exposure within each of these business lines. The capital charge for each
business line is calculated by multiplying gross income by a factor (denoted beta)
assigned to that business line. Beta serves as a proxy for the industry-wide
relationship between the operational risk loss experience for a given business line
and the aggregate level of gross income for that business line. It should be noted
that in the Standardised Approach gross income is measured for each business
line, not the whole institution, i.e. in corporate finance, the indicator is the gross
income generated in the corporate finance business line.

4. The total capital charge is calculated as the simple summation of the regulatory
capital charges across each of the business lines. The total capital charge may be
expressed as:

KTSA = {Σ1-3 years max [∑ (GI1-8*β1-8 ),0]}/3
Where:

KTSA = the capital charge under the Standardised Approach
GI1-8 = annual gross income in a given year, for each business lines

β1-8 = a fixed percentage, set by the Committee, relating the level of
required capital to the level of the gross income for each of the 8
business lines. The values of the β are detailed below:

Business Lines

Indicator

Corporate finance
Trading and sales
Retail banking
Commercial banking
Payment and settlement
Agency services
Asset management
Retail brokerage

Gross income
Gross income
Gross income
Gross income
Gross income
Gross income
Gross income
Gross income

Beta factors
(%)
β1
β2
β3
β4
β5
β6
β7
β8

Beta
values (%)
18
18
12
15
18
15
12
12

Qualifying Criteria for Standardised Approach
5. In order to qualify for use of the Standardised Approach, a bank must satisfy its
supervisor that, at a minimum:
•

Its Board of Directors and senior management, as appropriate, are actively
involved in the oversight of the operational risk management framework;

•

It has an operational risk management system that is conceptually sound
and is implemented with integrity; and

•

It has sufficient resources in the use of the approach in the major business
lines as well as the control and audit areas.

6. Supervisors will have the right to insist on a period of initial monitoring of a
bank's Standardised Approach before it is used for regulatory capital purposes.
7. A bank must develop specific policies and have documented criteria for
mapping gross income for current business lines and activities into the
standardised framework. The criteria must be reviewed and adjusted for new or
changing business activities as appropriate. The principles for business line
mapping are set out in Annex 2 of the Guidance Note.
8. As some internationally active banks will wish to use the Standardised
Approach, it is important that such banks have adequate operational risk
management systems. Consequently, an internationally active bank using the
Standardised Approach must meet the following additional criteria (for other

banks, these criteria are recommended, with national discretion to impose them
as requirements):

(a)

The bank must have an operational risk management system with
clear responsibilities assigned to an operational risk management
function. The operational risk management function is responsible for
developing strategies to identify, assess, monitor and control/mitigate
operational risk; for codifying firm-level policies and procedures
concerning operational risk management and controls; for the design
and implementation of the firm’s operational risk assessment
methodology; and for the design and implementation of a riskreporting system for operational risk.

(b)

As part of the bank’s internal operational risk assessment system, the
bank must systematically track relevant operational risk data including
material losses by business line. Its operational risk assessment
system must be closely integrated into the risk management
processes of the bank. Its output must be an integral part of the
process of monitoring and controlling the banks operational risk
profile. For instance, this information must play a prominent role in
risk reporting, management reporting, and risk analysis. The bank
must have techniques for creating incentives to improve the
management of operational risk throughout the firm.

(c)

There must be regular reporting of operational risk exposures,
including material operational losses, to business unit management,
senior management, and to the board of directors. The bank must
have procedures for taking appropriate action according to the
information within the management reports.

(d)

The bank’s operational risk management system must be well
documented. The bank must have a routine in place for ensuring
compliance with a documented set of internal policies, controls and
procedures concerning the operational risk management system,
which must include policies for the treatment of non-compliance
issues.

(e)

The bank’s operational risk management processes and assessment
system must be subject to validation and regular independent review.
These reviews must include both the activities of the business units
and of the operational risk management function.

(f)

The bank’s operational risk assessment system (including the internal
validation processes) must be subject to regular review by external
auditors and/or supervisors.

The Alternative Standardised Approach
9. At national supervisory discretion a supervisor can choose to allow a bank to
use the Alternative Standardised Approach (ASA) provided the bank is able to
satisfy its supervisor that this alternative approach provides an improved basis by,
for example, avoiding double counting of risks. Once a bank has been allowed to
use the ASA, it will not be allowed to revert to use of the Standardised Approach
without the permission of its supervisor. It is not envisaged that large diversified
banks in major markets would use the ASA. Under the ASA, the operational risk
capital charge/methodology is the same as for the Standardised Approach except
for two business lines – retail banking and commercial banking. For these
business lines, loans and advances – multiplied by a fixed factor ‘m’ – replaces
gross income as the exposure indicator. The betas for retail and commercial
banking are unchanged from the Standardised Approach. The ASA operational
risk capital charge for retail banking (with the same basic formula for commercial
banking) can be expressed as:

KRB = βRB x m x LARB
Where
- KRB is the capital charge for the retail banking business line
- βRB is the beta for the retail banking business line
- LARB is total outstanding retail loans and advances (non-risk weighted and
gross of provisions), averaged over the past three years
- m is 0.035
10. For the purposes of the ASA, total loans and advances in the retail banking
business line consists of the total drawn amounts in the following credit portfolios:

retail, SMEs treated as retail, and purchased retail receivables. For commercial
banking, total loans and advances consists of the drawn amounts in the following
credit portfolios: corporate, sovereign, bank, specialised lending, SMEs treated as
corporate and purchased corporate receivables. The book value of securities held
in the banking book should also be included.
11. Under the ASA, banks may aggregate retail and commercial banking (if they
wish to) using a beta of 15%. Similarly, those banks that are unable to
disaggregate their gross income into the other six business lines can aggregate
the total gross income for these six business lines using a beta of 18% with
negative gross income treated at para 3 of the Standardised Approach for
operational risk.
12. As under the Standardised Approach, the total capital charge for the ASA is
calculated as the simple summation of the regulatory capital charges across each
of the eight business lines.
Advanced Measurement Approaches (AMA)
13. Under the AMA, the regulatory capital requirement will equal the risk measure
generated by the bank’s internal operational risk measurement system using the
quantitative and qualitative criteria for the AMA discussed below. Use of the AMA
is subject to supervisory approval.

14. A bank adopting the AMA may, with the approval of its host supervisors and
the support of its home supervisor, use an allocation mechanism for the purpose
of determining the regulatory capital requirement for internationally active banking
subsidiaries that are not deemed to be significant relative to the overall banking
group but are themselves subject to this Framework in accordance with the scope
of application. Supervisory approval would be conditional on the bank
demonstrating to the satisfaction of the relevant supervisors that the allocation
mechanism for these subsidiaries is appropriate and can be supported empirically.
The board of directors and senior management of each subsidiary are responsible
for conducting their own assessment of the subsidiary’s operational risks and

controls and ensuring the subsidiary is adequately capitalised in respect of those
risks.

15. Subject to supervisory approval as discussed in paragraph 23 (d) below, the
incorporation of a well-reasoned estimate of diversification benefits may be
factored in at the group-wide level or at the banking subsidiary level. However,
any banking subsidiaries whose host supervisors determine that they must
calculate stand-alone capital requirements (Scope of Application in the Revised
Framework – Part 1) may not incorporate group-wide diversification benefits in
their AMA calculations (e.g. where an internationally active banking subsidiary is
deemed to be significant, the banking subsidiary may incorporate the
diversification benefits of its own operations – those arising at the subconsolidated level – but may not incorporate the diversification benefits of the
parent).

16. The appropriateness of the allocation methodology will be reviewed with
consideration given to the stage of development of risk-sensitive allocation
techniques and the extent to which it reflects the level of operational risk in the
legal entities and across the banking group. Supervisors expect that AMA banking
groups will continue efforts to develop increasingly risk-sensitive operational risk
allocation techniques, notwithstanding initial approval of techniques based on
gross income or other proxies for operational risk.

17. Banks adopting the AMA will be required to calculate their capital requirement
using this approach as well as the 1988 Accord as outlined in paragraph 46 of the
Revised Framework.

(i) General standards
18. In order to qualify for use of the AMA a bank must satisfy its supervisor that, at
a minimum:
•

Its board of directors and senior management, as appropriate, are actively
involved in the oversight of the operational risk management framework;

•

It has an operational risk management system that is conceptually sound
and is implemented with integrity; and

•

It has sufficient resources in the use of the approach in the major business
lines as well as the control and audit areas.

19. A bank’s AMA will be subject to a period of initial monitoring by its supervisor
before it can be used for regulatory purposes. This period will allow the supervisor
to determine whether the approach is credible and appropriate. As discussed
below, a bank’s internal measurement system must reasonably estimate
unexpected losses based on the combined use of internal and relevant external
loss data, scenario analysis and bank-specific business environment and internal
control factors. The bank’s measurement system must also be capable of
supporting an allocation of economic capital for operational risk across business
lines in a manner that creates incentives to improve business line operational risk
management.

(ii) Qualitative standards
20. A bank must meet the following qualitative standards before it is permitted to
use an AMA for operational risk capital:
(a) The bank must have an independent operational risk management
function that is responsible for the design and implementation of the bank’s
operational risk management framework. The operational risk management
function is responsible for codifying firm-level policies and procedures concerning
operational risk management and controls; for the design and implementation of
the firm’s operational risk measurement methodology; for the design and
implementation of a risk-reporting system for operational risk; and for developing
strategies to identify, measure, monitor and control/mitigate operational risk.
(b) The bank’s internal operational risk measurement system must be closely
integrated into the day-to-day risk management processes of the bank. Its output
must be an integral part of the process of monitoring and controlling the bank’s
operational risk profile. For instance, this information must play a prominent role in
risk reporting, management reporting, internal capital allocation, and risk analysis.
The bank must have techniques for allocating operational risk capital to major
business lines and for creating incentives to improve the management of
operational risk throughout the firm.
(c) There must be regular reporting of operational risk exposures and loss
experience to business unit management, senior management, and to the board
of directors. The bank must have procedures for taking appropriate action
according to the information within the management reports.

(d) The bank’s operational risk management system must be well
documented. The bank must have a routine in place for ensuring compliance with
a documented set of internal policies, controls and procedures concerning the
operational risk management system, which must include policies for the
treatment of non-compliance issues.
(e) Internal and/or external auditors must perform regular reviews of the
operational risk management processes and measurement systems. This review
must include both the activities of the business units and of the independent
operational risk management function.
(f) The validation of the operational risk measurement system by external
auditors and/or supervisory authorities must include the following:
• Verifying that the internal validation processes are operating in a
satisfactory manner; and
•

Making sure that data flows and processes associated with the
risk measurement system are transparent and accessible. In
particular, it is necessary that auditors and supervisory
authorities are in a position to have easy access, whenever they
judge it necessary and under appropriate procedures, to the
system’s specifications and parameters.

(iii) Quantitative standards
AMA soundness standard
21. Given the continuing evolution of analytical approaches for operational risk,
the Committee is not specifying the approach or distributional assumptions used
to generate the operational risk measure for regulatory capital purposes.
However, a bank must be able to demonstrate that its approach captures
potentially severe ‘tail’ loss events. Whatever approach is used, a bank must
demonstrate that its operational risk measure meets a soundness standard
comparable to that of the internal ratings-based approach for credit risk, (i.e.
comparable to a one year holding period and a 99.9th percentile confidence
interval).
22. The Committee recognises that the AMA soundness standard provides
significant flexibility to banks in the development of an operational risk
measurement and management system. However, in the development of these
systems, banks must have and maintain rigorous procedures for operational risk
model development and independent model validation. Prior to implementation,
the Committee will review evolving industry practices regarding credible and

consistent estimates of potential operational losses. It will also review
accumulated data, and the level of capital requirements estimated by the AMA,
and may refine its proposals if appropriate.

Detailed criteria
23. This section describes a series of quantitative standards that will apply to
internally-generated operational risk measures for purposes of calculating the
regulatory minimum capital charge.
(a) Any internal operational risk measurement system must be consistent
with the scope of operational risk defined by the Committee in paragraph 644 of
the Revised Framework and the loss event types defined in Annex 3.
(b) Supervisors will require the bank to calculate its regulatory capital
requirement as the sum of expected loss (EL) and unexpected loss (UL), unless
the bank can demonstrate that it is adequately capturing EL in its internal
business practices. That is, to base the minimum regulatory capital requirement
on UL alone, the bank must be able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of its
national supervisor that it has measured and accounted for its EL exposure.
(c) A bank’s risk measurement system must be sufficiently ‘granular’ to
capture the major drivers of operational risk affecting the shape of the tail of the
loss estimates.
(d) Risk measures for different operational risk estimates must be added
for purposes of calculating the regulatory minimum capital requirement. However,
the bank may be permitted to use internally determined correlations in operational
risk losses across individual operational risk estimates, provided it can
demonstrate to the satisfaction of the national supervisor that its systems for
determining correlations are sound, implemented with integrity, and take into
account the uncertainty surrounding any such correlation estimates (particularly in
periods of stress). The bank must validate its correlation assumptions using
appropriate quantitative and qualitative techniques.
(e) Any operational risk measurement system must have certain key
features to meet the supervisory soundness standard set out in this section.
These elements must include the use of internal data, relevant external data,
scenario analysis and factors reflecting the business environment and internal
control systems.
(f) A bank needs to have a credible, transparent, well-documented and
verifiable approach for weighting these fundamental elements in its overall
operational risk measurement system. For example, there may be cases where
estimates of the 99.9th percentile confidence interval based primarily on internal
and external loss event data would be unreliable for business lines with a heavy-

tailed loss distribution and a small number of observed losses. In such cases,
scenario analysis, and business environment and control factors, may play a more
dominant role in the risk measurement system. Conversely, operational loss event
data may play a more dominant role in the risk measurement system for business
lines where estimates of the 99.9th percentile confidence interval based primarily
on such data are deemed reliable. In all cases, the bank's approach for weighting
the four fundamental elements should be internally consistent and avoid the
double counting of qualitative assessments or risk mitigants already recognised in
other elements of the framework.
Internal data
24. Banks must track internal loss data according to the criteria set out in this
section. The tracking of internal loss event data is an essential prerequisite to the
development and functioning of a credible operational risk measurement system.
Internal loss data is crucial for tying a bank's risk estimates to its actual loss
experience. This can be achieved in a number of ways, including using internal
loss data as the foundation of empirical risk estimates, as a means of validating
the inputs and outputs of the bank's risk measurement system, or as the link
between loss experience and risk management and control decisions.

25. Internal loss data is most relevant when it is clearly linked to a bank's current
business activities, technological processes and risk management procedures.
Therefore, a bank must have documented procedures for assessing the on-going
relevance of historical loss data, including those situations in which judgement
overrides, scaling, or other adjustments may be used, to what extent they may be
used and who is authorised to make such decisions.

26. Internally generated operational risk measures used for regulatory capital
purposes must be based on a minimum five-year observation period of internal
loss data, whether the internal loss data is used directly to build the loss measure
or to validate it. When the bank first moves to the AMA, a three-year historical
data window is acceptable (this includes the parallel calculations in paragraph 46
of the Revised Framework).

27. To qualify for regulatory capital purposes, a bank's internal loss collection
processes must meet the following standards:

•

To assist in supervisory validation, a bank must be able to map its historical
internal loss data into the relevant level 1 supervisory categories defined in
Annexes 2 and 3 and to provide these data to supervisors upon request. It
must have documented, objective criteria for allocating losses to the
specified business lines and event types. However, it is left to the bank to
decide the extent to which it applies these categorisations in its internal
operational risk measurement system.

•

A bank's internal loss data must be comprehensive in that it captures all
material activities and exposures from all appropriate sub-systems and
geographic locations. A bank must be able to justify that any excluded
activities or exposures, both individually and in combination, would not
have a material impact on the overall risk estimates. A bank must have an
appropriate de minimis gross loss threshold for internal loss data collection,
for example Rs.10,000. The appropriate threshold may vary somewhat
between banks, and within a bank across business lines and/or event
types. However, particular thresholds should be broadly consistent with
those used by peer banks.

•

Aside from information on gross loss amounts, a bank should collect
information about the date of the event, any recoveries of gross loss
amounts, as well as some descriptive information about the drivers or
causes of the loss event. The level of detail of any descriptive information
should be commensurate with the size of the gross loss amount.

•

A bank must develop specific criteria for assigning loss data arising from an
event in a centralised function (e.g. an information technology department)
or an activity that spans more than one business line, as well as from
related events over time.

•

Operational risk losses that are related to credit risk and have historically
been included in banks’ credit risk databases (e.g. collateral management
failures) will continue to be treated as credit risk for the purposes of
calculating minimum regulatory capital under this Framework. Therefore,
such losses will not be subject to the operational risk capital charge (This
applies to all banks, including those that may only now be designing their
credit risk and operational risk databases). Nevertheless, for the purposes
of internal operational risk management, banks must identify all material
operational risk losses consistent with the scope of the definition of
operational risk (as set out in the definition of operational risk and the loss
event types outlined), including those related to credit risk. Such material
operational risk-related credit risk losses should be flagged separately
within a bank’s internal operational risk database. The materiality of these
losses may vary between banks, and within a bank across business lines
and/or event types. Materiality thresholds should be broadly consistent with
those used by peer banks.

•

Operational risk losses that are related to market risk are treated as
operational risk for the purposes of calculating minimum regulatory capital
under this Framework and will therefore be subject to the operational risk
capital charge.

External data
28. A bank’s operational risk measurement system must use relevant external
data (either public data and/or pooled industry data), especially when there is
reason to believe that the bank is exposed to infrequent, yet potentially severe,
losses. These external data should include data on actual loss amounts,
information on the scale of business operations where the event occurred,
information on the causes and circumstances of the loss events, or other
information that would help in assessing the relevance of the loss event for other
banks. A bank must have a systematic process for determining the situations for
which external data must be used and the methodologies used to incorporate the
data (e.g. scaling, qualitative adjustments, or informing the development of
improved scenario analysis). The conditions and practices for external data use
must be regularly reviewed, documented, and subject to periodic independent
review.

Scenario analysis
29. A bank must use scenario analysis of expert opinion in conjunction with
external data to evaluate its exposure to high-severity events. This approach
draws on the knowledge of experienced business managers and risk
management experts to derive reasoned assessments of plausible severe losses.
For instance, these expert assessments could be expressed as parameters of an
assumed statistical loss distribution. In addition, scenario analysis should be used
to assess the impact of deviations from the correlation assumptions embedded in
the bank’s operational risk measurement framework, in particular, to evaluate
potential losses arising from multiple simultaneous operational risk loss events.
Over time, such assessments need to be validated and re-assessed through
comparison to actual loss experience to ensure their reasonableness.

Business environment and internal control factors
30. In addition to using loss data, whether actual or scenario-based, a bank’s firmwide risk assessment methodology must capture key business environment and
internal control factors that can change its operational risk profile. These factors
will make a bank’s risk assessments more forward-looking, more directly reflect
the quality of the bank’s control and operating environments, help align capital
assessments with risk management objectives, and recognise both improvements
and deterioration in operational risk profiles in a more immediate fashion. To
qualify for regulatory capital purposes, the use of these factors in a bank’s risk
measurement framework must meet the following standards:
•

The choice of each factor needs to be justified as a meaningful driver of
risk, based on experience and involving the expert judgment of the affected
business areas. Whenever possible, the factors should be translatable into
quantitative measures that lend themselves to verification.

•

The sensitivity of a bank’s risk estimates to changes in the factors and the
relative weighting of the various factors need to be well reasoned. In
addition to capturing changes in risk due to improvements in risk controls,
the framework must also capture potential increases in risk due to greater
complexity of activities or increased business volume.

•

The framework and each instance of its application, including the
supporting rationale for any adjustments to empirical estimates, must be
documented and subject to independent review within the bank and by
supervisors.

•

Over time, the process and the outcomes need to be validated through
comparison to actual internal loss experience, relevant external data, and
appropriate adjustments made.

(iv) Risk mitigation
31. Under the AMA, a bank will be allowed to recognise the risk mitigating impact
of insurance in the measures of operational risk used for regulatory minimum
capital requirements. The recognition of insurance mitigation will be limited to 20%
of the total operational risk capital charge calculated under the AMA.
32. A bank’s ability to take advantage of such risk mitigation will depend on
compliance with the following criteria:

•

The insurance provider has a minimum claims paying ability rating of A (or
equivalent).

•

The insurance policy must have an initial term of no less than one year. For
policies with a residual term of less than one year, the bank must make
appropriate haircuts reflecting the declining residual term of the policy, up
to a full 100% haircut for policies with a residual term of 90 days or less.

•

The insurance policy has a minimum notice period for cancellation of 90
days.

•

The insurance policy has no exclusions or limitations triggered by
supervisory actions or, in the case of a failed bank, that preclude the bank,
receiver or liquidator from recovering for damages suffered or expenses
incurred by the bank, except in respect of events occurring after the
initiation of receivership or liquidation proceedings in respect of the bank,
provided that the insurance policy may exclude any fine, penalty, or
punitive damages resulting from supervisory actions.

•

The risk mitigation calculations must reflect the bank’s insurance coverage
in a manner that is transparent in its relationship to, and consistent with, the
actual likelihood and impact of loss used in the bank’s overall determination
of its operational risk capital.

•

The insurance is provided by a third-party entity. In the case of insurance
through captives and affiliates, the exposure has to be laid off to an
independent third-party entity, for example through re-insurance, that
meets the eligibility criteria.

•

The framework
documented.

•

The bank discloses a description of its use of insurance for the purpose of
mitigating operational risk.

for

recognising

insurance

is

well

reasoned

and

33. A bank’s methodology for recognising insurance under the AMA also needs to
capture the following elements through appropriate discounts or haircuts in the
amount of insurance recognition:
•

The residual term of a policy, where less than one year, as noted above;

•

A policy’s cancellation terms, where less than one year; and

•

The uncertainty of payment as well as mismatches in coverage of
insurance policies.

Partial use
34. A bank will be permitted to use an AMA for some parts of its operations and
the Basic Indicator Approach or Standardised Approach for the balance (partial
use), provided that the following conditions are met:
•

All operational risks of the bank’s global, consolidated operations are
captured;

•

All of the bank’s operations that are covered by the AMA meet the
qualitative criteria for using an AMA, while those parts of its operations that
are using one of the simpler approaches meet the qualifying criteria for that
approach;

•

On the date of implementation of an AMA, a significant part of the bank’s
operational risks are captured by the AMA; and

•

The bank provides its supervisor with a plan specifying the timetable to
which it intends to roll out the AMA across all but an immaterial part of its
operations. The plan should be driven by the practicality and feasibility of
moving to the AMA over time, and not for other reasons.

35. Subject to the approval of its supervisor, a bank opting for partial use may
determine which parts of its operations will use an AMA on the basis of business
line, legal structure, geography, or other internally determined basis.

36. Subject to the approval of its supervisor, where a bank intends to implement
an approach other than the AMA on a global, consolidated basis and it does not
meet the third and/or fourth conditions in paragraph 34 above, the bank may, in
limited circumstances:
• Implement an AMA on a permanent partial basis; and
• Include in its global, consolidated operational risk capital
requirements the results of an AMA calculation at a subsidiary
where the AMA has been approved by the relevant host
supervisor and is acceptable to the bank’s home supervisor.
37. Approvals of the nature described in paragraph 36 above should be granted
only on an exceptional basis. Such exceptional approvals should generally be
limited to circumstances where a bank is prevented from meeting these conditions
due to implementation decisions of supervisors of the bank’s subsidiary
operations in foreign jurisdictions.

BIBILOGRAPHY
1. Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, Sound Practices for the
Management and Supervision of Operational Risk, February 2003.
2. Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, International Convergence of
Capital Measurement and Capital Standards – A Revised Framework, June
2004.
3. Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, Framework for Internal Control
Systems in Banking Organisations, September 1998

